docs: 35.0.0 release notes (#18630)
druid-io/druid: docs/release-info/release-notes.md

Projections now support static filters. Additionally, there have been general improvements to performance and reliability.

[#18342](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18342) [#18535](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18535)

### Virtual storage (experimental)

[#18176](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18176)

### New input format

Druid now supports a `lines` input format. Druid reads each line from an input as UTF-8 text and creates a single column named `line` that contains the entire line as a string. Use this for reading line-oriented data in a simple form for later processing.

[#18433](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18433)

### Multi-stage query task engine

The MSQ task engine is now a core capability of Druid rather than an extension. It has been in the default extension load list for several releases. 

Remove `druid-multi-stage-query` from `druid.extensions.loadList` in `common.runtimes.properties` before you upgrade.

Druid 35.0.0 will ignore the extension if it's in the load list. Future versions of Druid will fail to start since it can't locate the extension.

[#18394](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18394)

### Improved monitor loading

> You can now specify monitors in `common.runtime.properties`. Previously, you needed to define monitors in the specific `runtime.properties` file for the service a monitor is meant for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now specify monitors in `common.runtime.properties` and each monitor will be loaded only on the applicable server types. Previously, you needed to define monitors in the specific `runtime.properties` file for the service a monitor is meant for.
```

- Added better support for MSQ task engine-based compaction tasks. They now use the stages pane to render the compaction report instead of showing the JSON [#18545](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18545)
- Added a version column to the **Services** tab so that you can see what version a service is running. This is helpful during rolling upgrades to verify the state of the cluster and upgrade [#18542](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18542)
- Improved the resiliency of the web console when the supervisor history is extensive [#18416](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18416) 

### Ingestion

#### Dimension schemas

At ingestion time, dimension schemas in `dimensionsSpec` are now strictly validated against allowed types. Previously an invalid type would fall back to string dimension. Now, such values are rejected. Users must specify a type that's one of the allowed types. Omitting type still defaults to string, preserving backward compatibility.

[#18565](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18565)

#### Other ingestion improvements

- Added support for session tokens (`sessionToken`) to the S3 input source [#18609](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18609)

> - Improved task performance. Druid now polls from memory before fetching task information from the metadata database [#18448](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18448)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improved performance of task APIs served by the Overlord. Druid now reads the in-memory state of the Overlord before fetching task information from the metadata store [#18448](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18448)
```

  - `IF` expressions where the `THEN` and `ELSE` expressions [#18507](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18507)
- Improved projections so that the granularity in queries can match UTC time zones [#18403](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18403)
- Improved the deserialization time for intervals by more than 40% [#18477](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18477)
- Improved the performance of `AND`/`OR` as well as `NOT`/`IS TRUE`/`IS FALSE` [#18491](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18491) [#18488](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18488)
- Improved the performance of scan queries [#18441](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18441)
- Improved the performance of metadata queries by parallelizing them at the data-node level [#18592](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18592)

### Cluster management

#### Labels for the metadata table

You can now configure labels for Druid services. Use the `druid.labels` field in the configuration options for the service and provide a JSON object of key-value pairs, such as `druid.labels={"location":"Airtrunk"}` or `druid.labels.location=Airtrunk`.

> One way to view these labels is on the **Services** tab in the web console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These labels can be queried using the `sys.servers` system table and are also displayed on the **Services** tab in the web console.
```

[#18547](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18547)

#### TLS server configs

Add a `druid.server.https.forceApplyConfig` config flag to indicate that the `TLSServerConfig` values should be applied irrespective of whether a preexisting `SslContextFactory.Server` binding exists.

[#18610](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18610)

#### Error message strategy

You can now configure Druid to log an error message and return an error ID for non-user targeted messages. This can be configured by setting `druid.server.http.errorResponseTransform.strategy` to `persona`.

[#18487](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18487)

#### Kerberos authentication

The `druid.auth.authenticator.kerberos.cookieSignatureSecret` config is now mandatory. 

[#18368](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18368)

#### Other cluster management improvements

> - Added a `version` column `sys.server`. This is useful during rolling upgrades to verify the state of the cluster [#18542](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18542)

Reviewer: A `labels` column has also been added to `sys.server` in #18547

[#18368](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18368)

#### Multi-stage query task engine

The MSQ task engine is now a core capability of Druid rather than an extension. It has been in the default extension load list for several releases. 

Remove `druid-multi-stage-query` from `druid.extensions.loadList` in `common.runtimes.properties` before you upgrade.

Druid 35.0.0 will ignore the extension if it's in the load list. Future versions of Druid will fail to start since it cannot locate the extension.

[#18394](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18394)

#### pac4j extension

Due to the upgrade from `pac4j` 4 to 5, session serialization has changed from `pac4j`’s `JavaSerializer` to standard Java serialization. As a result, clients of clusters using the `pac4j` extension may be logged out during rolling upgrades and need to re‑authenticate.

### Incompatible changes

#### Java 11 support removed

Upgrade to Java 17 or 21. Note that some versions of Java 21 encountered issues during test, specifically Java 21.05-21.07. If possible, avoid these versions.

[#18424](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18424)

> ### Developer notes

Reviewer: A note about the new embedded tests in this section would be nice too.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18147

Set the `druid.indexer.runner.k8sAndWorker.http.httpClientType` config to `vertx` (default), `okhttp`, or `jdk`.

[#18540](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18540)

#### Pod logs

You can now set a timeout for asynchronous operations that interact with k8s pod logs: `druid.indexer.runner.podLogOperationTimeout`.

[#18587](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18587)

##### Task logs

For Middle Manager-less ingestion, persisting task logs no longer have the potential to block indefinitely. Instead, there is a time limit for persisting logs, that if breached, results in giving up on the persist. The default timeout is 5 minutes, but can be configured by overriding `druid.indexer.runner.logSaveTimeout` with a duration, such as `PT60S`.

Additionally, task log storage for the Kubernetes runner is now optional. 

[#18444](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18444) [#18341](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18341)

##### Improved fault tolerance

> The Kubernetes extension is now more resilient against certain transient faults. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `druid-kubernetes-overlord-extensions` that uses Kubernetes for launching and managing tasks instead of the Middle Managers is now more resilient against certain transient faults.
```

#### Other ingestion improvements

- Added support for session tokens (`sessionToken`) to the S3 input source [#18609](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18609)
- Improved performance of task APIs served by the Overlord. Druid now reads the in-memory state of the Overlord before fetching task information from the metadata store [#18448](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18448)
- Improved task execution so that they can successfully complete even if there are problems pushing logs and reports to deep storage [#18210](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18210)

#### SQL-based ingestion

##### Other SQL-based ingestion improvements

- Added the ability to configure the maximum frame size. Generally, you don't need to change this unless you have very large rows [#18442](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18442)
- Added logging for when segment processing fails [#18378](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18378)
- Improved logging to store the cause of invalid field exceptions [#18517](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18517) [#18517](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18517)

#### Streaming ingestion

##### Other streaming ingestion improvements

> - Added a count parameter to the supervisor history API [#18416](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18416)

Reviewer 3: This is already mentioned in web console improvement?

[#18424](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18424) [#18623](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18623)

#### Kerberos authentication

The `druid.auth.authenticator.kerberos.cookieSignatureSecret` config is now mandatory. 

[#18368](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18368)

#### Multi-stage query task engine

The MSQ task engine is now a core capability of Druid rather than an extension. It has been in the default extension load list for several releases. 

Remove `druid-multi-stage-query` from `druid.extensions.loadList` in `common.runtimes.properties` before you upgrade.

Druid 35.0.0 will ignore the extension if it's in the load list. Future versions of Druid will fail to start since it cannot locate the extension.

[#18394](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18394)

#### pac4j extension

> Due to the upgrade from `pac4j` 4 to 5, session serialization has changed from `pac4j`’s `JavaSerializer` to standard Java serialization. As a result, clients of clusters using the `pac4j` extension may be logged out during rolling upgrades and need to re‑authenticate.

Reviewer 3: actually i misread

[#18246](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18246)

#### Breaking change for SQL metadata extensions

The `MetadataStorageActionHandler` extension point now has simpler APIs.
This is a breaking change for any SQL metadata extensions in the wild.
The changes for PostgreSQL, MySQL and SQLServer are already complete. [#18479](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18479)

#### `DriudLeaderClient` removed

`DruidLeaderClient` has been removed from extensions and replaced with a `ServiceClient`-based implementation. Additionally, `CoordinatorServiceClient` for querying non-core APIs exposed by the Coordinator is available through `druid-server`.

[#18297](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18297) [#18326](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18326)

#### Dependency updates

The following dependencies have been updated:

- `pac4j` version 4.5.7 to 5.7.3 [#18259](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18259)
- `nimbus-jose-jwt` version 8.22.1 to 9.37.2 [#18259](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18259)
- `oauth2-oidc-sdk` version 8.22 to 10.8 [#18259](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18259)

> - `avactica` version 1.25.0 to 1.26.0 [#18421](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18421)

Reviewer 3: we're actually on 1.27.0 due to CVE. A bunch of upgrades here: https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18671.

This section contains important information about new and existing features.

### Jetty

Druid 35 uses Jetty 12. This change may impact your deployment. For more information,see [the upgrade note for Jetty 12](#jetty-12)

### Java support

Druid now supports Java 21. Note that some versions of Java 21 encountered issues during test, specifically Java 21.05-21.07. If possible, avoid these versions.

Additionally, support for Java 11 has been removed. Upgrade to Java 17 or 21. 

[#18424](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18424) [#18624](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18624)

### Projections 

Projections now support static filters. Additionally, there have been general improvements to performance and reliability.

> [#18342](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18342) [#18535](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18535)

Author: ```suggestion
Projections have been improved:

- Static filters are now supported
- The granularity in queries can match UTC time zones 

Additionally, there have been general improvements to performance and reliability.  

[#18342](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18342) [#18535](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18535) [#18403](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/18403)
```
